Good day, sir.
I am glad you're well.
I have not seen you long.
How goes the world?
Oh, it wears, sir, as itgrows.
Ay, that's well known: butwhat particular rarity?
What strange,
which manifold record notmatches?
See, magic of bounty!
All these spirits thy powershave conjured to attend.
I know the merchant.
I know them both; theother's a jeweller.
Oh, 'tis a worthy lord.
Nay, that's most fixed.
A most incomparable man,breathed, as it were,
to an untirable andcontinuate goodness:
he passes.
I have a jewel here
Oh, pray, let's see it.
For the Lord Timon, sir?
If he will touch theestimate:
but, for that
'Tis a good form.
And rich, yes.
You are rapt, sir, in somework,
some dedication to thegreat Lord.
A thing slipped idly fromme.
Our poesy is as a gum
which oozes from whence'tis nourished:
the fire in the flint showsnot till it be struck;
our gentle flame provokesitself
and like the current flieseach bound it chafes.
What have you there?
A picture, sir.
When comes your bookforth?
Upon the heels of mypresentment, sir.
Let's see your piece.
It's a good piece.
Oh, so 'tis:
this comes off well andexcellent.
Indifferent.
Admirable: how this gracespeaks his own standing.
What a mental power thiseye shoots forth.
How big imagination movesin this lip.
To the dumbness of thegesture one might interpret.
It's a pretty mocking ofthe life.
Here is a touch; is itgood?
I will say of it, ittutors nature:
Artificial strife lives inthese touches,
livelier than life.
How this lord is followed.
The senators of Athens:happy man.
Look, more.
You see this confluence, thisgreat flood of visitors?
I have, in this roughwork, shaped out a man,
whom this beneath worlddoth embrace and hug
with amplestentertainment:
my free drift halts notparticularly,
but moves itself in a widesea of tacks:
no levelled malice infects onecomma in the course I hold;
but flies an eagle flight,bold and forth on,
leaving no tract behind.
How shall I understandyou?
I will unbolt to you.
You see how allconditions, how all minds,
as well of glib andslippery creatures
as of grave and austerequality,
tender down their servicesto Lord Timon:
his large fortune upon his goodand gracious nature hanging
subdues and properties tohis love and tendence
all sorts of hearts;
yea, from the glass-facedflatterers
to Apemantus,
whom few things loves betterthan to abhor himself:
even he drops down theknee before him
and returns in peace mostrich in Timon's nod.
I saw them speak together.
Sir, I have on a high andpleasant hill
feigned fortune to be throned:the base of the mount
is ranked with all deserts,all kind of natures,
that labor on the bosom ofthis sphere
to propagate their states.
Amongst them all, whoseeyes are on this sovereignlady fixed,
one do I personate of LordTimon's frame,
whom fortune with herivory hand wafts to her;
whose present grace topresent slaves and servants
translates his rivals.
'Tis conceived to scope.
This throne, this fortune,and this hill, methinks,
with one man beckoned fromthe rest below,
bowing his head againstthe sleepy mount
to climb his happiness,
would be well expressed inour condition.
Nay, sir, but hear me on.
All those which were hisfellows but of late
Mmm.
No, no, no, no. No, no, no.
But of late.
Even better than hisvalue,
on the moment follow hisstrides,
his lobbies fill withtendance,
rain sacrificialwhisperings in his ear,
make sacred even hisstirrup,
and through him drink thefree air.
Ay, marry, what of these?
When fortune in her shiftand change of mood
spurns down her latebeloved,
all his dependants thatlabor after him
to the mountain's top, evenon their knees and hands,
let him slip down,
not one accompanying hisdeclining foot.
'Tis common: a thousandmoral paintings I can show
that shall demonstrate thesequick blows of fortune's
more pregnantly thanwords.
Yet you do well to showLord Timon
that mean eyes have seenthe foot above the head.
Imprisoned is he, say you?
Ay, my good lord.
Five talents is his debt,
his means most short, hiscreditors most strait:
your honorable letter hedesires
to those have shut him up;
which failing, periods hiscomfort.
Noble Ventidius!
Well; I am not of that featherto shake off my friend
when he must needs me.
I do know him a gentlemanwell deserves a help:
which he shall have: I'llpay the debt and free him.
Your Lordship ever bindshim.
Commend me to him.
I will send his ransom;
and being enfranchised,bid him come to me.
'Tis not enough to helpthe feeble up,
but to support him after.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
Freely, good father.
Thou hast a servant namedLucilius.
Yes, I have so: what ofhim?
Most noble Timon, call theman before thee.
Attends he here, or no?
Lucilius!
Here, at Your Lordship'sservice.
This fellow here, LordTimon, this thy creature
at night frequents myhouse.
I am a man that from my firsthave been inclined to thrift;
and my estate deserves anheir more raised
than one which holds atrencher.
Well; what further?
One only daughter have I,no kin else,
on whom I may confer whatI have got.
The maid is fair, of theyoungest for a bride,
and I have bred her at mydearest cost
in qualities of the best.
This man of thine attemptsher love.
I prithee, noble Lord,join with me
to forbid him her resort;
myself have spoke in vain.
The man is honest.
Therefore he will be,Timon:
his honesty rewards him initself;
it must not bear mydaughter.
Does she love him?
She is young and apt.
Our own precedent passionsdo instruct us
what levity's in youth.
And love you the maid?
Ay, my good Lord, and sheaccepts of it.
If, in her marriage, myconsent is missing,
I call the gods to witness,
I will choose mine heirfrom forth the beggarsof this world,
and dispossess her all!
How shall she be endowed,
if she be mated with anequal husband?
Three talents on thepresent; in future, all.
This gentleman of minehath served me long.
To build his fortune, Iwill strain a little,
for 'tis a bond in men.
Give him thy daughter.
What you bestow, in him,I'll counterpoise,
make him weigh with her.
My noble Lord,
pawn me to this yourhonor, she is his.
My hand to you; my honoron my promise.
Humbly I thank YourLordship.
Never may that state offortune fall into my keeping,
that is not owed to you.
Vouchsafe my labor, andlong live Your Lordship!
I thank you; you shallhear from me anon.
What have you there, myfriend?
A piece of painting, whichI do beseech Your Lordshipto accept.
Painting is welcome.
Painting is almost thenatural man;
or since dishonor trafficswith man's nature,
he is but outside.
these pencilled figures areeven such as they give out.
I like your work; youshall find I like it.
Wait attendance till youhear further from me.
The gods preserve you!
Well fare you, gentleman.
Give me your hand; we mustneeds dine together, hmm?
Sir, sir, your jewel hathsuffered under praise.
What, my lord?
Dispraise?
A mere satiety ofcommendations.
If I should pay you for itas 'tis extolled,
it would unclew me quite.
My lord, 'tis rated as thosewhich sell would give.
But you well know, thingsof like value
differing in the owners
are prized by theirmasters.
Believe it, dear lord,
you mend the jewel by thewearing it.
Well mocked.
Oh, no, my good lord;
he speaks the commontongue, which all menspeak with him.
Look, who comes here: willyou be chid?
We'll bear, with YourLordship.
We'll spare none.
Good morrow to thee,gentle Apemantus.
Till I be gentle, staythou for thy good morrow;
when thou art Timon's dog,and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call themknaves?
Thou knowest them not.
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
Then I repent not.
You know me, Apemantus?
Thou knowest I do: Icalled thee by thy name.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
Of nothing so much as thatI am not like Timon.
Whither art going?
To knock out an honestAthenian's brains.
That's a deed thou'lt diefor.
Right, if doing nothing bedeath by the law.
How likest thou thispicture, Apemantus?
The best, for theinnocence.
Wrought he not well thatpainted it?
He wrought better thatmade the painter;
and yet he's but a filthypiece of work.
You're a dog.
Thy mother's of mygeneration: what's she, ifI be a dog?
Wilt dine with me,Apemantus?
No; I eat not lords.
And thou shouldst, thouwouldst anger ladies.
O, they eat lords; so theycome by great bellies.
That's a lasciviousapprehension.
So thou apprehendest it.
Take it for thy labor.
How dost thou like thisjewel, Apemantus?
Not as well as plain dealing,
which will not cost a mana doit.
What dost thou think 'tisworth?
Not worth my thinking.
How now, poet!
How now, philosopher!
Thou liest.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lie not.
Art not a poet?
Yes.
Then thou liest.
Look in thy last work,
where thou hast feignedhim a worthy fellow.
That's not feigned; he isso.
Yes, he is worthy of thee andto pay thee for thy labor.
He that loves to be flatteredis worthy of the flatterer.
Heavens, that I were alord.
What wouldst do then,Apemantus?
Even as Apemantus does now;hate a lord with my heart.
What, thyself?
Ay.
Wherefore?
That I had no angry wit tobe a lord.
Art not thou a merchant?
Ay, Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, ifthe gods will not!
If traffic do it, the godsdo it.
Traffic's thy god; and thygod confound thee.
What trumpet's that?
'Tis Alcibiades, and sometwenty horse,
all of companionship.
Pray, entertain them; givethem guide to us.
Now go not you hence tillI've thanked you.
When dinner's done, youshow me this piece.
I am joyful of your sights.
Oh.
Most welcome, sir!
Sir, you have saved mylonging,
and I feed most hungerlyon your sight.
Right welcome, sir!
Ere we depart, we'll sharea bounteous time
in different pleasures.
Pray, pray let us in.
So, so, there!
Aches contract and starveyour supple joints!
That there should be smalllove among these sweet knaves,
and all this courtesy.
The strain of man's bredout into baboon and monkey
What time of day is it,Apemantus?
Time to be honest.
That time serves still.
The more accursed thou,that still omittest it.
Thou art going to LordTimon's feast?
Ay, to see meat fill knavesand wine heat fools.
Fare thee well, fare theewell.
Thou art a fool to bid mefarewell twice.
Why, Apemantus?
Shouldst have kept one tothyself,
for I mean to give theenone.
Hang thyself!
No, I will do nothing atthy bidding:
make thy requests to thyfriend.
Away, unpeaceable dog, orI'll spurn thee hence!
I will fly, like a dog,the heels of the ass.
Hee-haw.
He's opposite to humanity.
Come, shall we in, andtaste Lord Timon's bounty?
He outgoes the very heartof kindness.
He pours it out;
Plutus, the god of gold,is but his steward.
No meed, but he repayssevenfold above itself;
no gift to him, but breedsthe giver a return
exceeding all use of quittance.
The noblest mind he carriesthat ever governed man.
Long may he live infortunes.
Shall we in?
I'll keep you company.
Most honored Timon!
Ventidius!
Oh!
It hath pleased the gods toremember my father's age,
and call him to longpeace.
He is gone happy, and hasleft me rich.
And, as in grateful virtue Iam bound to your free heart,
I do return those talents,
doubled with thanks andservice,
from whose help I derivedliberty.
Oh, by no means, honestVentidius;
you mistake my love:
I gave it freely ever;
and there's none can trulysay he gives,
if he receives.
If our betters play atthat game,
we must not dare toimitate them.
Faults that are rich arefair.
A noble spirit.
Nay, my lord.
Ceremony was but devisedat first
to set a gloss on faintdeeds,
hollow welcomes, recantinggoodness,
sorry ere 'tis shown;
But where there is truefriendship, there needs none.
Pray, sit;
more welcome are ye to myfortunes
than my fortunes are tome.
My lord, we have alwaysconfessed it.
Oh, confessed it!
Hanged it, have you not?
Oh, Apemantus, you arewelcome.
No, you shall not make mewelcome.
I come to have thee thrustme out of doors.
Fie, thou art a churl;
you've a humor there doesnot become a man:
'tis much to blame.
They say, my lords, "irafuror brevis est;"
but yond man is everangry.
Go, let him have a tableby himself,
for he does neither affectcompany,
nor is he fit for it, indeed.
Let me stay at thineapperil, Timon.
I come to observe;
I give thee warning on it.
I take no heed of thee;
Thou art an Athenian,therefore welcome:
I myself would have nopower;
prithee, let my meat makethee silent.
I scorn thy meat;
'twould choke me, for Ishould ne'er flatter thee.
O you gods, what a numberof men eats Timon,
and he sees 'em not!
It grieves me to see somany
dip their meat in oneman's blood;
and all the madness is, hecheers them up too.
I wonder men dare trustthemselves with men:
Methinks they should invitethem without knives;
good for their meat, andsafer for their lives.
There's much example forit;
the fellow that sits next him,now parts bread with him,
pledges the breath of himin a divided draught,
is the readiest man tokill him.
It has been proved.
If I were a huge man, Iwould fear to drink at meals
lest they should spy mywindpipe's dangerous notes:
Great men should drink withharness on their throats.
My lords, in heart.
And let the health goround.
Let it flow this way, mygood lord.
Flow this way!
A brave fellow!
He keeps his tides well.
Those healths will makethee and thy state lookill, Timon.
Here's that which is tooweak to be a sinner,
honest water,
which ne'er left man inthe mire:
It and my food are equals;
there's no odds.
Feasts are too proud togive thanks to the gods.
Immortal gods, I craveno pelf;
I pray for no man butmyself.
Grant I may never prove sofond
to trust man on his oathor bond;
or a harlot, for herweeping;
or a dog, that seemsa-sleeping;
or a keeper with myfreedom;
or my friends, if I shouldneed 'em.
Amen.
So fall to it.
Rich men sin, and I eatroot.
Much good dich thy goodheart, Apemantus.
All!
May it please Your Honor.
Lord Lucius, out of hisfree love,
hath presented to you fourmilk-white horses
trapped in silver.
I shall accept themfairly.
Let the presents beworthily entertained.
Please you, my lord,
Lord Lucullus entreatsyour company tomorrow
to hunt with him,
and has sent Your Honortwo brace of greyhounds.
I'll hunt with him.
Let them be well received,not without fair reward.
Captain Alcibiades, yourheart's in the field now.
My heart's ever at yourservice, my good lord.
Had you rather be at abreakfast of enemies
than a dinner of friends?
So they were bleeding-new,my lord,
there's no meat like them:
I could wish my bestfriend at such a feast.
Would all those flattererswere thy enemies then,
that then thou mightst kill'em and bid me to 'em!
Might we but have thathappiness, my lord,
that you would once useour hearts,
whereby we might expresssome part of our zeals,
we should think ourselvesforever perfect.
No doubt, my good friends,but the gods themselves
have provided I shall havemuch help from you.
How had you been myfriends else?
Why have you that charitabletitle from thousands,
did not you chiefly belongto my heart?
I have told more of you tomyself
than you can with modestyspeak in your own behalf;
and thus far, I confirmyou.
O you gods, think I, whatneed we have any friends,
should we ne'er have needof 'em?
They're the most needlesscreatures living,
should we ne'er have useof 'em,
and should most resemblesweet instruments
hung up in cases that keeptheir sounds to themselves.
Why, I have often wishedmyself poorer,
that I might come nearerto you.
We're born to do benefits:
and what better or properercan we call our own
than the riches of ourfriends?
O, what a precious comfort'tis,
to have so many, likebrothers,
commanding one another'sfortunes.
Oh, joy's even made a wayere it can be born.
Mine eyes cannot hold outwater, methinks.
To forget their faults, Idrink to you.
Thou weepest to make themdrink, Timon.
Joy had the likeconception in our eyes,
and that instant, like ababe, sprung up.
I laugh to think that babea bastard.
I promise you, my lord,you moved me much.
Much!
How now? What means thattrump?
Please you, my lord, thereare certain ladies
most desirous ofadmittance.
Ladies!
What are their wills?
There comes with them aforerunner, my lord,
which bears that office, tosignify their pleasures.
Well, let them have kindadmittance.
Music, make their welcome.
Hail, hail, hail to thee,worthy Timon,
and to all that of hisbounties taste!
The five best sensesacknowledge thee their patron;
and come freely to gratulatethy plenteous bosom:
There, taste, touch, all,
there, taste, touch, all,
pleased from thy tablerise;
They only now come but tofeast thine eyes.
You see, my lord, howample you are beloved?
Hoy-day, what a sweep ofvanity comes this way!
They dance.
They are mad women.
Like madness is the gloryof this life.
As this pomp shows to alittle oil and root.
We make ourselves fools todisport ourselves;
and spend our flatteriesto drink those men
upon whose age we void itup again
with poisonous spite andenvy.
Who lives that's notdepraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears notone spurn to their graves
of their friends' gift?
I should fear that thosethat dance before me now
would one day stamp uponme.
It has been done.
Men shut their doorsagainst a setting sun.
You have done our pleasuresmuch grace, fair ladies,
set a fair fashion on ourentertainment.
I am to thank you for it.
My lord, you take us evenat the best.
'Faith, for the worst isfilthy;
and would not hold taking,I doubt me.
Flavius, the little casketbring me hither.
Yes, my lord.
More jewels yet!
There is no crossing himin his humor;
Else I should tell him
well, in faith I should
when all's spent,
he would be crossed then,he could.
'Tis pity bounty had noteyes behind,
that man might ne'er bewretched for his mind.
Ah, Flavius.
My lord, honor me so muchas to advance this jewel;
accept it and wear it,kind my lord.
I am so far already inyour gifts
So are we all.
I beseech Your Honor,vouchsafe me a word;
it does concern you near.
Near!
Why, then, another timeI'll hear:
What will this come to?
He commands us to provideand give great gifts,
and all out of an emptycoffer:
Nor will he know hispurse, or yield me this,
to show him what a beggarhis heart is,
being of no power to makehis wishes good.
His promises fly so beyondhis state
that what he speaks is allin debt;
he owes for every word.
He is so kind that he nowpays interest for it;
his land's put to theirbooks.
Well, would I were gentlyput out of office
before I were forced out.
Happier is he that has nofriend to feed
than such that do evenenemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for mylord.
You do yourselves too muchwrong,
you bate too much of yourown merits:
Here, my lord, a token ofour love.
With more than commonthanks I will receive it.
O, he is the very soul ofbounty!
Now I do remember, mylord,
you gave good words theother day
of a bay courser I rodeon:
it is yours, because youliked it.
Oh, I beseech you, pardonme, my lord, in that.
You may take my word.
I know no man can justly praisebut what he does affect:
I weigh my friend'saffection with mine own;
I'll tell you true.
I'll call to you.
Oh, none so welcome.
I take all and yourseveral visitations sokind to heart,
'tis not enough to give;
methinks I could dealkingdoms to my friends
and ne'er be weary.
Alcibiades, thou art a soldier,therefore seldom rich;
It comes in charity tothee:
for all thy living isamongst the dead.
All the lands thou hastlie in a pitched field.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
We are so virtuouslybound.
And I to you.
So infinitely endeared
So I to you.
Lights, more lights!
The best of happiness,honor and fortunes,
keep with you, Lord Timon!
Ready for his friends.
What a coil's here.
Serving of becks andjutting-out of bums.
I doubt whether their legsbe worth the sums
that are paid for them.
Friendship's full ofdregs.
Methinks false hearts shouldnever have sound legs,
thus honest fools lay outtheir wealth on curtsies.
Now, Apemantus, if thouwert not sullen,
I would be good to thee.
No, I'll nothing:
for if I should be bribedtoo,
there would be none leftto rail upon thee,
and then thou wouldst sinthe faster.
Thou givest so long,Timon,
I fear me thou wilt giveaway thyself in papershortly:
what need these feasts,pomps and vainglories?
Nay, and you begin to railupon society once,
I am sworn not to giveregard to you.
Farewell.
Come again with better music.
So thou wilt not hear me now;
thou shalt not then:
I'll lock thy heaven fromthee.
Oh, that men's ears shouldbe to counsel deaf,
but not to flattery.
Here, my lord.